Welcome to Barbican's developer documentation!
==============================================

Barbican is the OpenStack Key Manager service. It provides secure storage,
provisioning and management of secret data.  This includes keying material
such as Symmetric Keys, Asymmetric Keys, Certificates and raw binary data.

Barbican for Users
==================

If you're trying to learn how to use barbican, you can start by reading about
`Secrets in the Barbican API Guide <http://developer.openstack.org/api-guide/key-manager/secrets.html>`__.

Once you're comfortable working with secrets you can dig into the rest of the
API.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   api/index

Barbican for Developers
=======================

If you're new to OpenStack development you should start by reading the
`OpenStack Developer's Guide`_.

.. _`OpenStack Developer's Guide`: http://docs.openstack.org/infra/manual/developers.html

Once you've read the OpenStack guide you'll be ready to set up a local barbican
development environment.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   setup/dev
   setup/devstack

When you're ready to dive deeper in to barbican take a look at:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   contribute/getting_involved
   contribute/architecture
   contribute/structure
   contribute/dataflow
   contribute/dependencies
   contribute/database_migrations
   plugin/index
   testing

Barbican for Operators
======================

If you're looking for information for deploying and configuring barbican you
will probably want to read:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   setup/index
   admin-guide-cloud/index

This documentation is generated by the Sphinx toolkit and lives in the source
tree.


Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
